
Algebraic Statistics
    (For the geometric perspective) there was an a movement called
    `information geometry' in the 1980s that attempted to apply
    differential geometry to questions in probability.

    (For the computational algorithms)  Things like polynomial
    ideals are reasonably nice to deal with.  If you've heard of
    them, Groebner basis techniques are important here.

Algebraic Geometry
    It's the geometry that starts from the geometry of polynomials
        (say, lines, parabolas, conics, et cetera)
    and goes off from there.


    -- slide change --

    The algebraic geometry that I'll be using should be of the
    relatively concrete sort, however.

    Mumford ...

The Probability Simplex
    We can look at probability distributions geometrically.

    For simplicity, we only consider discrete (finite) models.

    Geometrically, 
        the 0-simplex is a point, 
        the 1-simplex is a line segment, 
        the 2-simplex is a triangle, and 
        the 3-simplex is a tetrahedron.

    They're manifolds with boundary (if you know what they are).

    Also, they're semialgebraic sets -- they're determined by
    polynomial equations and polynomial equalities.

Example: Independence Model
    Say that we have two random variables, both binary.

    If they're independent, then they have to factor into some pair
    of functions.

    -- slide change --

    Because there are four possible states, we need four
    probabilities (the p_ij's).  They're in a 3-dimensional space.

    It turns out that we can translate this independence condition
    (actually any independence condition) into some polynomial
    constraints.

    The model is a 2-dimensional hypersurface contained inside the
    probability simplex.

    Because we're only adding polynomial constraints, the model is
    still a semialgebraic set.

Restricted Boltzmann Machine

    The restricted Boltzmann machine is a model over visible and
    hidden binary values.  With energy and probability ...

    The bipartite graph corresponds to the fact that the visible
    variables, in a sense, don't interact with each other.  A
    general Boltzmann machine (instead of `restricted') might have
    more or fewer edges.
    
    The Boltzmann machine is a specific example of a `graphical
    model'

    The normalizing constant Z is usually called the partition
    function.  
    
    The pattern (with energy and exponential) is common in
    statistical mechanics.  With binary values, it's called the
    Ising model, and it models the spins of particles.

    (Explain marginalization and max-likelihood) ...

DBN
    Machine learning

Credits
    CC and BSD licenses, resp.
